The Indian Premier League (IPL) is a men's Twenty20 (T20) cricket league, organized by the Board of Control for Cricket in India, the national governing body of cricket in India. T20 cricket is a shorter format of the game, with each team playing a single innings of 20 overs. The inaugural season of the IPL was held in 2008, and the tournament has been held annually in India[a] ever since.[1] Currently, ten teams compete for the championship.[3] Since the league's inception, eight teams have won the title, with the Mumbai Indians and Chennai Super Kings both securing five titles each.

Indian batsman Virat Kohli holds the records for the most runs scored (9,336), the most centuries (9), most half-centuries (68), most runs in a single season (973), most runs as a captain (4,994) and the most catches (126). Indian bowler Yuzvendra Chahal holds the record for the most wickets taken (231).[4][5]

Indian batsman Rohit Sharma and wicket-keeper MS Dhoni are the most successful captains in the league, each winning five titles. Dhoni also holds the record for the most matches played. West Indies batsman Chris Gayle holds several individual batting records, including the highest individual score in a match (175*), the most sixes scored (357), the most sixes in a match (17), and the fastest century (off 30 balls). West Indies bowler Alzarri Joseph holds the record for the best bowling figures with 6/12.

The Mumbai Indians hold the record for playing and winning the most matches, while the Gujarat Titans (GT) have the highest win percentage (61.03%). Sunrisers Hyderabad (SRH) scored the most runs in a match with a score of 287/3 against the Royal Challengers Bengaluru (RCB) in 2024, breaking their own record of 277/3 against the Mumbai Indians earlier in the same season.[6] The highest successful run chase in the league's history was achieved by the Punjab Kings (PBKS), as they chased down a target of 265 set by the Delhi Capitals (DC) in 2026. The Royal Challengers Bengaluru scored the lowest total, making just 49 runs against the Kolkata Knight Riders in 2017. 


By season
Out of the fifteen franchises that have played in the league, Chennai Super Kings and Mumbai Indians are the most successful teams in the league's history with five titles each, with Kolkata Knight Riders having won three titles and Royal Challengers Bengaluru having won two titles. The teams who have won the title once are Rajasthan Royals, Deccan Chargers, Sunrisers Hyderabad and Gujarat Titans. The current champions are Royal Challengers Bengaluru, who defeated Gujarat Titans in the 2026 Indian Premier League final to win their second consecutive title, becoming only the third team after Chennai Super Kings and Mumbai Indians to successfully defend an IPL title. 

